# CHAPTER 19 Financial Statement Analysis

 The `income statement` is a summary of the profitability of the firm over a period of time, such as a year. It presents revenues generated during the operating period, the expenses incurred during that same period, and the company's net earnings or profits, which are simply the difference between revenues and expenses.

The `balance sheet` provides a "snapshot" of the financial condition of the firm at a particular moment. The balance sheet is a list of the firm's assets and liabilities at that moment. The difference in assets and liabilities is the net worth of the firm, also called `shareholders'` or `stockholders' equity`.

The `statement of cash flows` tracks the cash implications of transactions.

**Return on Assets, ROA** `Return on assets` equals EBIT as a fraction of the firm's total assets:
$$
\text{ROA} = \frac{\text{EBIT}}{\text{Total assets}}
$$
, the numerator of this ratio may be viewed as total operating income of the firm. Therefore, ROA tells us the income earned per dollar deployed in the firm.

**Return on Capital, ROC** Return on capital expresses EBIT as a fraction of long-term capital, shareholders' equity plus long-term debt. It tells us the income earned per dollar of long-term capital invested in the firm:
$$
\text{ROC} = \frac{\text{EBIT}}{\text{Long-term capital}}
$$
**Return on Equity, ROE** Whereas ROA and ROC measure profitability relative to funds raised by both debt and equity financing, `return on equity` focuses only on the profitability of equity investments. It equals net income realized by shareholders per dollar they have invested in the firm:
$$
\text{ROE} = \frac{\text{Net income}}{\text{Shareholders' equity}}
$$
We can summarize the exact relationship among ROE, ROA, and leverage in the following equation:
$$
ROE = (1 - \text{Tax rate}) \left[ROA + (ROA - \text{Interest rate}) \frac{Debt}{Equity}\right]
$$
, the relationship has the following implications. If there is no debt or if the firm's ROA equals the interest rate on its debt, its ROE will simply equal $(1 - \text{Tax rate}) \times ROA$. If its ROA exceeds the interest rate, then its ROE will exceed $(1 - \text{Tax rate}) \times ROA$ by an amount that will be greater the higher the debt-to-equity ratio.

To account for this opportunity cost, we might measure the success of the firm using the `difference` between the return on capital, ROC, and the opportunity cost of capital, $k$. `Economic value added` is the spread between ROC and $k$ multiplied by the capital invested in the firm. It therefore measures the dollar value of the firm's return in excess of its opportunity cost. Another term for EVA (the term coined by Stern Stewart, a consulting firm that has promoted its use) is `residual income`.

To understand the factors affecting a firm's ROE, particularly its trend over time and its performance relative to competitors, analysts often "decompose" ROE into the product of a series of ratios. Each component ratio is in itself meaningful, and the process serves to focus the analyst's attention on the separate factors influencing performance. This kind of decomposition of ROE is often called the `DuPont system`. One useful decomposition of ROE is:
$$
ROE = \frac{\text{Net profit}}{\text{Equity}} = \frac{\text{Net profits}}{\text{Pretax profits}} \times \frac{\text{Pretax profits}}{\text{EBIT}} \times \frac{\text{EBIT}}{\text{Sales}} \times \frac{\text{Sales}}{\text{Assets}} \times \frac{\text{Assets}}{\text{Equity}}
$$
`Profit margin` or `return on sales (ROS)`, which equals operating profit per dallar of sales.

`Total asset turnover (ATO)`. It indicates the efficiency of the firm's use of assets in the sense that it measures the annual sales generated by each dollar of assets.

A closely related statistic to the interest burden ratio is the `interest coverage ratio`, or `times interest earned`. The ratio is defined as:
$$
\text{Interest coverage} = \text{EBIT}/\text{Interest expense}
$$
, a high coverage ratio indicates that the likelihood of bankruptcy is low because annual earnings are significantly greater than annual interest obligations. It is widely used by both leaders and borrowers in determining the firm's debt capacity and is a major determinant of the firm's bond rating.

We can summarize all of these relationships as follows:
$$
\text{ROE} = \text{Tax burden} \times \text{Interest burden} \times \text{Margin} \times \text{Turnover} \times \text{Leverage}
$$
, Because:
$$
ROA = Margin \times Turnover
$$
, and:
$$
\text{Compound leverage factor} = \text{Interest burden} \times \text{Leverage}
$$
, we can decompose ROE equivalently as follows:
$$
\text{ROE} = \text{Tax burden} \times \text{ROA} \times \text{Compound leverage factor}
$$
`inventory turnover ratio`, which is the ratio of cost of goods sold per dollar of average inventory.

Another aspect of efficiency surrounds management of accounts receivable, which is often measured by `days sales in receivables`, that is, the average level of accounts receivable expressed as a multiple of daily sales. It is computed as average accounts $receivable / sales \times 365$ and may be interpreted as teh number of days' worth of sales tied up in accounts receivable. You can also think of it as the average lag between the date of sale and the date payment is received, and is therefore also called teh `average collection period`.

Leverage is one measure of teh safety of a firm's debt. Debt ratios compare the firm's indebtedness to broad measures of its assets, and coverage ratios compare various measures of eaning power against the cash flow needed to satisfy debt obligations. But leverage is not the only determinant of financial prudence. You also want to know that a firm can lay its hands on cash either to pay its scheduled obligations or to meet unforeseen obligations. `Liquidity` is the ability to convert assets into cash at short notice. liquidity is commonly measured using the current ratio, quick ratio, and cash ratio:

1. `Current ratio`: Current assets/current liabilities. This ratio measures the ability fo the firm to pay off its current liabilities by liquidating its current assets (i.e., turning them into cash). It indicates the firm's ability to avoid insolvency in the short run.

2. `Quick ratio`: (Cash + marketable securities + receivables) / current liabilities. This ratio is also called the `acid test ratio`. It has the same denominator as the current ratio, but its numerator includes only cash, cash equivalents, and receivables. The quick ratio is a better measure of liquidity than the current ratio for firms whose inventory is not readity convertible into cash.

3. `Cash ratio`. A company's receivables are less liquid than its holdings of cash and marketable securities. Therefore, in addition to the quick ratio, analysts also compute a firm's cash ratio, defined as:
   $$
   \text{Cash ratio} = \frac{\text{Cash} + \text{Marketable securities}}{\text{Current liabilities}}
   $$

The `market-book-value ratio (P/B)` equals the market price of a share of the firm's common stock divided by its `book value`, that is, shareholders' equity per share.

In any event, the important points to remember are that ownership of the stock conveys the right to future as well as current earnings and, therefore, that a high P/E ratio may best be interpreted as a signal that the market views the firm as enjoying attractive growth opportunities. Before leaving the P/B and P/E ratios, it is worth pointing out an important relationship between them:
$$
\text{ROE} = \frac{\text{Earnings}}{\text{Book value}} &= \frac{\text{Market price}}{\text{Book value}} \div \frac{\text{Market price}}{\text{Earnings}} \\
&= P/B \text{ ratio} \div P/E \text{ ratio}
$$
, by rearranging the terms, we find that a firm's P/E ratio equals its price-to-book ratio divided by ROE:
$$
\frac{P}{E} = \frac{P/B}{ROE}
$$
, thus a company with a high P/B ratio nevertheless can have a relatively low P/E if its ROE is high enough.

There are two commonly used ways to value inventories: `LIFO`(last-in first-out) and `FIFO`(first-in first-out).

Examples of the types of factors that influence quality of earnings are:

- Allowance for bad debt.
- Nonrecurring items.
- Earnings smoothing.
- Revenue recognition.
- Off-balance-sheet assets and liabilities.

Here are some of the major issues that you should be aware of when using the financial statements of foreign firms:

- Reserving practices.
- Depreciation.
- Intangibles.



## Summary

TODO